==================
Processing Raw Data
==================

This section describes how to process raw sequencing reads into genotype counts, and how to combine those counts into final values suitable for downstream statistical modeling.

There are two primary scripts for processing raw data:

1. ``tfs-process-fastq``: Analyzes paired-end FASTQ files to count the occurrence of each genotype.
2. ``tfs-process-counts``: Aggregates counts across multiple samples, predicts CFU per mL from OD600, and computes adjusted log-counts (``ln_cfu``) for analysis.

Configuration File (run_config.yaml)
------------------------------------

The ``tfs-process-fastq`` script requires a ``run_config.yaml`` file to describe the library of expected sequences. You can view or download an :download:`example run_config.yaml <run_config.yaml>` file. Below is a description of its expected fields:

* ``reading_frame``: Amino acid reading frame offset (0, 1, or 2).
* ``first_amplicon_residue``: Amino acid residue number for the first in-frame residue.
* ``wt_seq``: The wildtype nucleic acid sequence.
* ``degen_sites``: Degenerate codons defining the library as a string matching the length of ``wt_seq`` (e.g., using "NNS", "NNK", and "." to indicate wildtype).
* ``sub_libraries``: Defines contiguous blocks of library components cloned in together. "." indicates wildtype sequence; each unique character beside "." defines a unique sub-library (must be contiguous).
* ``expected_5p`` / ``expected_3p``: Flanking sequences just upstream and downstream of the amplicon.
* ``library_combos``: A list of strings formatted like ``single-x`` or ``double-x-y``, where ``x`` and ``y`` correspond to characters in the ``sub_libraries`` field. ``single-x`` specifies all individual degenerate codons in ``x``. ``double-x-y`` specifies double mutants between sub-libraries ``x`` and ``y``.
* ``spiked_seqs``: A list of specific nucleic acid sequences that are not part of the library but should be identified as controls.

tfs-process-fastq
-----------------

The ``tfs-process-fastq`` script takes a pair of paired-end FASTQ files and counts the protein genotypes observed in the reads. It compares the reads to a predefined library of expected sequences, ensuring quality filtering and accurate matching before returning the final genotype counts. 

**Why run it?** 
To convert raw sequencing output (FASTQ) into a quantifiable count dataframe for each sample, determining how many times each specific genotype was observed.

**Outputs:**
It generates two output CSV files in the specified ``out_dir``: 
- ``stats_[filename].csv``: Overall statistics on read success/failure rates.
- ``counts_[filename].csv``: The raw counts for each expected genotype.

**Usage:**

.. code-block:: bash

    tfs-process-fastq <f1_fastq> <f2_fastq> <out_dir> <run_config> [options]

**Positional arguments:**

* ``f1_fastq``: Path to the read 1 FASTQ file (can be gzipped).
* ``f2_fastq``: Path to the read 2 FASTQ file.
* ``out_dir``: Output directory to write the CSV files.
* ``run_config``: Path to a configuration file or dictionary initializing the expected library.

**Optional arguments:**

* ``--phred_cutoff``: Minimum Phred quality score (default: 10, bases below are assigned "N").
* ``--min_read_length``: Toss reads shorter than this length (default: 50).
* ``--allowed_num_flank_diffs``: Allowed mismatches when finding the 5' and 3' flanks (default: 1).
* ``--allowed_diff_from_expected``: Allowed mismatches from library genotypes (default: 2).
* ``--print_raw_seq``: If flagged, prints the sequence matches to standard output for debugging.
* ``--max_num_reads``: Stop processing after this many reads.
* ``--chunk_size``: Block size of reads to chunk for multiprocessing.
* ``--num_workers``: Number of parallel workers to use (defaults to available CPUs minus 1).

tfs-process-counts
------------------

The ``tfs-process-counts`` script takes the individual count CSV files generated by ``tfs-process-fastq``, aggregates them according to a sample metadata file, and infers absolute colony-forming units (CFU)/mL based on OD600 measurements.

**Why run it?** 
To merge all your individual sample reads into a unified dataset and translate raw, relative sequencing counts into biologically meaningful terms (ln(CFU)) given cell density.

**Outputs:**
A final combined CSV file (specified by ``output_file``) containing ``ln_cfu`` per genotype across all samples, ready for hierarchical modeling and analysis.

**Usage:**

.. code-block:: bash

    tfs-process-counts <sample_df> <counts_csv_path> <od600_calibration_data> <output_file> [options]

**Positional arguments:**

* ``sample_df``: Path to a CSV file describing samples, must contain ``sample`` and ``od600`` columns.
* ``counts_csv_path``: Directory path containing the observation CSV files.
* ``od600_calibration_data``: Path to a JSON or CSV holding OD600-to-CFU calibration parameters.
* ``output_file``: Desired filename for the merged and processed final CSV.

**Optional arguments:**

* ``--counts_glob_prefix``: The file prefix used to glob observation files (default: ``counts``).
* ``--min_genotype_obs``: The minimum overall observations required across samples to retain a genotype (default: 10).
* ``--pseudocount``: Pseudocount added to adjust zero-counts before log transformation (default: 1).
* ``--verbose``: Verbosity flag.
